INSEE code
The INSEE code (/ɪnseɪ/ in-SAY) is a numerical indexing code used by the French National Institute for
Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) to identify various entities, including communes and
départements. They are also used as national identification numbers given to people.



Created under Vichy
Although today this national identification number is used by social security in France and is present on
each person's social security card (carte Vitale), it was originally created under Vichy France under the
guise of the Registration Number to the National Directory of Identification of Physical People (Numéro
d'inscription au répertoire des personnes physiques, NIRPP or simply NIR). The latter was originally to
be used as a clandestine military recruitment tool, but in the end served to identify Jews, gypsies, and
other "undesirable" populations under Vichy's conceptions. The first digit of the NIR was 1 for a male
European, 2 for a female European, 3 for a male Muslim, 4 for a female Muslim, 5 for a male Jew, 6 for a
female Jew, 7 for a male foreigner, 8 for a female foreigner, while 9 and 0 were reserved for persons of
undetermined racial status.

The Demographic Service was created in 1940 in order to replace the military recruitment office
prohibited by the June 1940 Armistice with Nazi Germany. On October 11, 1941, the Demographic
Service absorbed the former General Statistics of France (SGF, created in 1833). The new organization
was called the National Statistical Service (Service national des statistiques, SNS).



National identification numbers
Each French person receives at birth a national identification number, the "numéro d'inscription au
répertoire" (NIR or National Repertory registration), also called a "numéro de sécurité sociale" (or Social
Security number). This INSEE number is composed of 13 digits + a two-digit key. Although the total
number is of 15 digits, its composition makes it easy for individuals to remember at least the first seven
digits (they just have to know their sex, year and month of birth, and department of birth).

Their format is as follows: syymmlloookkk cc,[1] where

    s is 1 for a male, 2 for a female,
    yy are the last two digits of the year of birth,
    mm is the month of birth, usually 01 to 12 (but there are special values for persons whose
    exact date of birth is not known),
    ll is the number of the department of origin : 2 digits, or 1 digit and 1 letter in metropolitan
    France, 3 digits for overseas.
    ooo is the commune of origin (a department is composed of various communes) : 3 digits in
    metropolitan France or 2 digits for overseas.
    kkk is an order number to distinguish people being born at the same place in the same year
    and month. This number is the one given by the Acte de naissance, an official paper which
    officialize a birth (and is needed throughout life for various administrative procedures, such
    as getting an identity card).
    'cc' is the "control key", 01 to 97, equal to 97-(the rest of the number modulo 97).
    There are exceptions for people in particular situations.[1]
The "sex" codes (s: 1 for male, 2 for female) can be given in special occasions for temporary
registrations, such as for someone who a person who works as a wage-earner but is not registered for
miscellaneous reasons. The sex code can be changed if someone underwent gender reassignment.[2]
Under Vichy France, but only in Algeria (not in metropolitan France) this s code was also used to register
Jews, Algerian Muslims, foreigners, or ill-defined people. Thus, 3 or 4 was given to Muslim people of
Algeria and of all colonies; 5 or 6 for indigenous Jews; 7 or 8 for foreigners; 9 or 0 for miscellaneous and
ill-defined status (people in none of these classes).

The part llooo is used together, referred to as the COG, which identifies the person's location of birth.[1]

They are also specific codes for people whose date or place of birth is unknown, although this is today
more and more rare (for example, the birth code is greater than 20 if the month of birth is unknown, and
the communal code is 990 if the commune of origin is unknown). For overseas departments, the
department number has three digits, and the communal number two digits (since 1950). People born
abroad have a departmental code of 99, and the communal code is replaced by the code of the country of
birth, which has three digits. Before 1964, departmental codes from 91 to 96 were used for Algeria,
Tunisia and Morocco.

If in a specified month the total number of births exceeds 999, an extension common code is created.

The last code is obtained by a mathematical method (dividing by 97 the number formed by the first 13
digits, taking the remainder from this division, and then the "complement to 97", that is the difference
between 97 and this remainder): this gives the control key code.



History
The NIR (National Identification Repertory) was created by René Carmille, who died at the Dachau
concentration camp in 1944. Between April and August 1941, under the Vichy regime, Carmille
conducted the first general survey to prepare the secret mobilisation of a French army. The codification
was then done by General Marie in Algeria, to obtain a census of Jews, Muslims and other categories.
The aim was to create a file of the whole of the French population and to discriminate according to ethnic
or statutory criteria, following the racial policies of Vichy. Thus, the first digit that is now used to
distinguish males and females then had other purposes: 3 or 4 for Algerian non-Jewish indigenous people,
5 or 6 for indigenous Jews, 7 or 8 for foreigners, and 9 or 0 for miscellaneous and ill-defined statutes.

This discriminatory categorization used in Algeria was abolished in 1944 and has never been used in
Metropolitan France where, throughout the war, only "1" and "2" (for male and female) was used. The
administration of the NIR was assigned in 1946 to the new Statistical Institute, the INSEE. This
institution is also in charge of the RNIPP (répertoire national d'identification des personnes physiques,
National Repertory of Identification of Physical Persons), which contains for each individual: the NIR,
last name, first name, sex, date and place of birth, and a reference of the Birth Registration (Acte de
naissance).
SIREN and SIRET codes
SIREN codes are given to businesses and nonprofit associations, SIRET codes to their establishments
and facilities (SIRENE database (https://web.archive.org/web/20090524161137/http://www.sirene.tm.f
r/)).



Geographical codes
INSEE also gives numerical indexing codes (French: les
Codes INSEE) to various administrative entities in France:

    INSEE codes (known as COG, for Code officiel
    géographique) are given to various administrative
    units, notably the French communes (they do not
    coincide with postcodes, as there are 36,778
    communes in France and many have the same
    name). The code has five digits:
        2 digits (département) and 3 digits (commune)
        for the 96 départements of Metropolitan France.
        3 digits (département or collectivity) and 2 digits
        (commune) for the overseas departments and
        overseas collectivities.
The departmental codes are well known since they were used
as the last two digits of vehicle registration plates (75 is Paris,   Map of France with INSEE former
13 Marseille, 31 Toulouse, etc.). However, this vehicle               region codes
registration plate numbering system became optional in 2009
so the last two digits no longer necessarily indicate the
department to which the car is registered.

The commune codes were assigned initially by numbering the alphabetically ordered list of commune
names within each department or overseas division. Exceptions have occurred over time because some
communes were renamed, some communes were split and new communes have been added to the end of
the list.

The departmental codes are also best known as part of the French postal codes; but the postal codes do
not include the INSEE commune numbers but were designed by geographical series starting by the main
city of the department and then split geographically around them, with additional series given for special
distribution. Some areas of the largest and most populated communes can also be assigned distinct series.
The postal codes do not indicate precisely the communes but the location of the post office in charge for
the distribution, and many rural communes share the same postal code number as the commune where the
post office is located.

There are also 5-digit INSEE codes for foreign countries and territories, beginning with 99.[3]
See also
    INSEE
    Biometrics
    National identification number
    National Insurance number (a similar number in the United Kingdom)
    Death Master File
    Social insurance number (a similar number in Canada)
    Uniform civil number (a similar number in Bulgaria)
    Personal ID Number (CURP) (Mexico) (a similar number in Mexico)
    Service number
    SNILS (a similar number in Russia)
    PAN (a similar number in India)
    Tax file number (a similar number in Australia)
    Cadastro de Pessoas Físicas (similar number in Brazil)
    NIE Number (a similar number in Spain)
    PPS number (Irish system)
    Codice Fiscale (a similar number in Italy)


References
 1. "Normalisation du numero INSEE des personnes physiques" (https://web.archive.org/web/2
    0160918212641/http://resoo.org/docs/_docs/regles-numero-insee.pdf) (PDF). Archived from
    the original (http://resoo.org/docs/_docs/regles-numero-insee.pdf) (PDF) on 2016-09-18.
    Retrieved 2015-05-13.
 2. "Changement de numéro de sécurité sociale" (https://wikitrans.co/2019/12/16/changement-
    de-numero-de-securite-sociale/). Wiki Trans (in French). 2019-12-16. Retrieved 2022-05-28.
 3. "Codification des pays et territoires étrangers" (https://www.insee.fr/fr/information/2028273).
    INSEE. Retrieved 4 July 2022.


External links
    INSEE official website (http://www.insee.fr/en/)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=INSEE_code&oldid=1346632636"
